When you hear the word
"cybercriminal",
what comes to mind?
You may imagine a hacker
hunched over a computer
in a dark room.
If this is what came to
mind, you're not alone.
In fact, this is what
most people outside
of security think of.
But online criminals
aren't always that
different from those
operating in the real world.
Malicious hackers are just
one type of online criminal.
They are a specific
kind that relies on
sophisticated computer
programming skills
to pull off their attacks.
There are other ways
to commit crimes
that don't require
programming skills.
Sometimes, criminals rely on
a more traditional
approach, manipulation.
Social engineering is
a manipulation
technique that exploits
human error to gain
private information,
access, or valuables.
These tactics trick
people into breaking
normal security procedures
on the attacker's behalf.
This can lead to data exposures,
widespread malware
infections, or
unauthorized access to
restricted systems.
Social engineering attacks
can happen anywhere.
They happen online, in-person,
and through other interactions.
Threat actors use many
different tactics
to carry out their attacks.
Some attacks can take a
matter of seconds to perform.
For example, someone
impersonating
tech support asks an employee
for their password to
fix their computer.
Other attacks can take
months or longer,
such as threat actors
monitoring an employee's
social media.
The employee might post a
comment saying they've gotten
a temporary position in a
new role at the company.
An attacker might use an
opportunity like this to target
the temporary worker,
who is likely to be
less knowledgeable about
security procedures.
Regardless of the timeframe,
knowing what to look for
can help you quickly
identify and stop an
attack in its tracks.
There are multiple stages of
social engineering attacks.
The first is usually to prepare.
At this stage, attackers
gather information
about their target.
Using the intel, they'll
determine the best
way to exploit them.
In the next stage, attackers
establish trust.
This is often referred
to as pretexting.
Here, attackers use
the information they
gathered earlier to open
a line of communication.
They'll typically disguise
themselves to trick
their target into a
false sense of trust.
After that, attackers
use persuasion tactics.
This stage is where the
earlier preparation
really matters.
This is when the
attacker manipulates
their target into
volunteering information.
Sometimes they do this by
using specific vocabulary
that makes them sound like a
member of the organization.
The final stage of the process
is to disconnect
from the target.
After they collect the
information they want,
attackers break communication
with their target.
They disappear to
cover their tracks.
Criminals who use social
engineering are stealthy.
The digital world has
expanded their capabilities.
It's also created more ways
for them to go unnoticed.
Still, there are ways that we
can prevent their attacks.
Implementing managerial
controls like policies,
standards, and procedures,
are one of the first
lines of defense.
For example, businesses
often follow
the patch management
standard defined in
NIST Special Publication 800-40.
These standards
are used to create
procedures for updating
operating systems,
applications, and firmware
that can be exploited.
Staying informed
of trends is also
a major priority for any
security professional.
An even better defense against
social engineering attacks is
sharing what you
know with others.
Attackers play on our
natural curiosity
and desire to help one another.
Their hope is that
targets won't think
too hard about what's going on.
Teaching the signs
of attack to others
goes a long way towards
preventing threats.
Social engineering is a
threat to the assets and
privacy of both individuals
and organizations.
Malicious attackers
use a variety of
tactics to confuse and
manipulate their targets.
When we get back
together next time,
we're going to explore one of
the most commonly
used techniques
that's a major problem for
organizations of all sizes.